Video title: Design System Discussions - Measurement
Author: Dan Mall, Nathan Curtis, Amy Hupe
Date: 05/13/2022
Url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IaQcyN66e58

what would it look like though if we didn’t focus on speed? Like what would design system, what would the design system world look like if that was just taken off the table? And then forgive me if I’m paraphrasing poorly or, bear with me to correct that. So that’s one thing that we could touch on that I think would be really interesting, you know, that I bet we all have thoughts on.

The other thing that we could talk about is like we sort of open this door to just metrics in general: like what should you measure? We talked about that a little bit last time but we didn’t really dive into that too much. So that’s another place that we could go: like what are things that are worth measuring, how do we measure them, what’s difficult to measure, what’s still worthwhile? You know, all of those things was kind of a door that we cracked open last time. So those are the two things that, to me, I think could be good starting points, but I’d love to hear from the two of you about if you have other things you want to add to that.

Well, um, I could pick up the thread on metrics. I have some stuff to say about that. So I think something I was kind of reflecting on after we spoke last time is: you said, Dan, I think you made a really good point, which is that moving fast isn’t the same as rushing, which I guess was kind of my initial complaint with that. You know, people who are measuring speed, in my view, all the people that I’m kind of working with and stuff, are often in an environment where they’re pressured to rush, um, which means kind of, um, a lot of the time sort of unacceptable compromises on quality. And I think that likewise, it’s kind of important to preface this whole conversation by saying that less than perfect isn’t the same as unacceptably bad. So, you know, I was kind of thinking about: what do we mean by quality? Like it’s not, you know, that saying just saying quality is probably not that helpful, because everybody has different ideas about what quality means and everybody, I guess, has different kind of non-negotiables and things that you know actually they may be happy to let slide.

And I would love to hear from both of you if, like, if you have any sort of specific thoughts around what quality means for design systems. And I would almost want you to clarify: are you talking about quality of the produced experience or quality of the design system that enables you to produce the experiences?

Yeah, that’s a really good question. I guess both, but I think that the thing that’s more realistic for design system teams to accurately kind of measure and quantify is the quality of the things that they produce and give to teams. I think that it’s definitely worth somehow engaging with the quality of the end product, and I don’t sort of buy the argument that I’ve heard a fair bit that design system teams can’t take any responsibility for the quality of the end product. But I do think that it becomes a lot harder to measure and it becomes a lot hazier in that respect, and I certainly think that’s something that they share responsibility for with the end product teams. I don’t think I likewise don’t think they can own it. So I guess for the purposes of this I’m thinking about the quality of the stuff that design system teams give to teams to use.

Yeah, I think if you remove the constraint of speed, that can certainly lead to higher quality, but I think that will also lead to a lack of satisfaction and a lack of evolution of the system being able to grow and evolve to suit the needs, and so people that will erode satisfaction and trust.

Um, I think about a conversation I had an hour and a half ago with a design system, uh, design lead who is creating a librarian Figma but started to use S, M, and L instead of, in the code in Sketch and Docs it’s SM, LG, MD for like those terms, and so it’s like a little leak in quality. I’m like, why are you changing that? Yeah, I kind of agree it should be one character but it leads to a lack of alignment of outputs. And so one of the aspects of quality that I aspire to is alignment across outputs. But would I block the release of a Figma library to get it in the hands of people using it if we already know what the levels are, we’re just quibbling on a little bit of the semantic naming? No, I would let it go. And so that’s where that good: perfect is the enemy of the good enough, like you were referring, I think you were implying, and the way you framed it too.

I’ve never heard that phrase, Nathan, that you just use. I love it: the leak, a leak in quality, cause like I think that describes well like what happens for better or worse at scale with design systems is like a leaking quality on a component. It’s like, ah, that’s not so bad, they’re doing a thing, but then times 60 components in the design system, times you know however many more usages of that, you know, or instances of that or implementations of that. That’s where the leak in quality becomes like, oh, that’s where our, our user, our experience is actually deficient by 50, you know, or something drastic because of all the scale of that. So, uh, thanks for that. I’m going to keep using that phrase: a leak in quality.

I wonder if the two of you think that, like, are there objective ways to measure or define quality? Because I know that my mind goes specifically to subjective ways right away like, and I don’t think that that’s complete. But what I think about quality of, I think Amy, how you phrased it, is: the things that people who are working on the design system work on, so like namely components, you know, at least largely components. When I think about the quality of component, I’m like: is that, like, the visual design? Is that like how tight the rounded corners are? Like that that’s where my mind goes when it comes to quality. But I wonder if the two of you think differently about that.

I think it depends. Um, that’s an annoying answer, isn’t it? No, I think I do think it kind of it depends on what we’re talking about like the quality of what specifically. So, um, I think a lot of the time it’s going to be a combination, isn’t it? Like the first place that my mind went when I thought about quality, the thing that is generally a kind of non-negotiable for me is accessibility. Like I just, that’s something that I feel is really important, and obviously you can make a really inaccessible bad user experience with some really accessible components.

So certainly I think it’s worth kind of thinking about like where the line is there between what a design system team can control and what product teams can control, especially on the subject of accessibility. But in terms of the kind of basic boxes that we can take, um, for me that kind of thing is reasonably measurable. I mean we have a, you know, standard, a global standard to follow there, and I think that you know sort of making sure that we’ve adhered to that. And kind of I think coming back to what Nathan was saying earlier but correct me if I’ve sort of misinterpreted this: it, I think that it kind of uses the system and it’s, it’s, it’s it works as part of the system—that also feels like quite an important quality measure. Because I think that the implications of it not doing that are quite, um, significant, I suppose. Like I think what kind of message does it send if we’re not even using our own system to make our system, if that makes sense.

So I guess for me like kind of I am quite, um, I am quite pedantic about that kind of thing. I’m quite, you know, specific about, um, about following system standards.

I love the word “pedantic” by the way. Uh, I love “pejorative” and “punitive” also as similar words anyway. Uh.

What you make me think about there is also the framing of the question. Like it is a very black and white question to talk about: is this of high quality or not? Well, everything’s on a continuum. I wrote an article about testing Figma components on Medium, and you can definitely establish the very specific criteria that you’re looking for: even when you start talking about layout, you start talking about fixed versus fluid and and height versus width, and you can break down how you assess the quality of something and whether it works as you expect it to in very well defined criteria. You can do that with accessibility, and so even there it’s it starts to get more onerous the more specific you get, and you start to exclude things that you actually intend, but you also establish a boundary like you’re not going to make meet all the accessibility criteria in your first pass based on WCAG 2.1 or whatever the latest release is.

And so even, Amy, it’s like I would be challenging you: how much accessibility, which criteria can we can we sort of flex on or not? Um, and the other thing particularly when if we bring it back to consistency, which is a hobgoblin of, I forgot the word—goblin of foolish minds—is the Emerson quote. Um, consistency. Like if you talk about the nav, you have a nav bar that goes at the top. Well, is everybody using it at the top, or is everybody locating the account profile in the upper right whereas everybody actually in the menu, showing the exact same length to navigate a shared space to, wavefind across journeys, to have crossover journeys that all weave together. Okay, I just mentioned a lot of different things, so actually what is consistency because the design system doesn’t own any of those questions, doesn’t know actually delivering on those things.

Like you talked about: when do you think or sorry, not when you think—when do each of you bring up that question when you work with clients, teams, you know, like because at some point I imagine you address it, right? So when, when does that happen? Is there a sequence that that goes in and I have that’s a leading question, I have an answer to that as well. Um, when do you, when do you bring that up? Oh, you’re such a consultant and you know what, as a client, what I I typically hear is: just tell us the answer, Dan. [Music]

Um, I I wonder, I I’m not trying to like just, I don’t have an answer, Dan. I like want to hear yours but, Amy, like I don’t want to disrupt your ability. I also want to hear yours. Dee, I know, I also want to clarify: when you say when do you ask clients that question, do you mean the question of what is consistency, who owns it? Yeah, when do we define what consistency is? Like is that a prerequisite to each of your work? Is that like, ah, we can figure that out later, there’s some other things that are bigger fish to fry? Like that that’s mostly what I’m poking at, is like where does that go in the sequence? Because I think and and this is I’ll, I’ll start I’ll give the framing for it, the that comes up a lot in in my work in that I think a lot of the teams I work with are surprised when those questions come up because it’s not where they think it’s like oh I would have thought we would have addressed that sooner or I would have thought we would have talked about that later. So that’s why I’m like oh, I wonder, I wonder where that that uh initial set of expectations come from.

And to be clear, are you talking about consistency of the end of the user experience, the eventual user experience? I think I’m talking about what, when do you even start talking about what are we gonna agree on as consistent? So like you know Nathan brought up a couple of different ways you could talk about consistency. My opinion about most design system things is it actually doesn’t matter what you agree on, it just matters that you agree on something. I’m like it doesn’t—the answer actually doesn’t matter, it just matters that this group of folks like align on that. So whether we define consistency is like everything in the nav has to be in the same place every time on every interface, or consistency just means we have all of these things present and where where you put them is up to you, that doesn’t need to be consistent. To me neither of those answers are wrong or right, it just matters that the team goes like, yeah, we agree that that’s the thing that we’re all gonna do.

So where does that conversation happen? Is that like all right, week one I’m starting with a new client, we’re gonna create a glossary that includes the definition of of consistency? Or for me personally I’m like, ah, let’s just let that emerge, you know, let’s just build some interfaces together or do some exercises together or do this other thing together, and then out of that then we’ll go: it seemed like what we were trying to make consistent was this and this and this, and now we can canonize that as our definition of our starting definition of consistency. But that happens weeks in as opposed to where some teams are like: I thought we would have done that on day one, on day one as we define quality and consistency and this and that and then we’re going to go follow those those definitions.

No, I mean I’m with you on feeling your way and thank you for clarifying that. I think where I was getting slightly distracted there was uh my pedantic brain again, and fixating on the idea that you know we can define consistency like, consistency is consistency is consistency just means consistency. So I think actually what we’re talking about defining here is like: consistency of what with what? And I think like, um, and sorry that’s not me trying to be a smart ass, that’s just me like turning the question over in my mind. And yeah, I really agree like I think sort of feeling your way as you go is really important there because there’s no point sort of trying to standardize things that don’t need standardizing and actually benefit from more kind of contextual attention and and divergence potentially so.

Um, yeah, I also I’m not particularly interested in starting out with saying like this stuff all has to be the same and this stuff should always be different. And you know I think it’s, it’s very much kind of something that you learn as you go along as people start to use the system and also you know as your audience broadens. Like it’s going to become potentially less possible to be consistent about things that might be feasible to align when you’re you’re only serving two teams, you know, whereas actually like I’m thinking of a client I’m working with right now and we’re focusing on kind of quite a, um, well-defined but narrow sort of portion of the organization, and I absolutely know that you know in two years time half of what we’ve built is probably not going to be relevant because it’s you know it’s going to go to a bit of the organization that just has a very different approach, like they’re operating in a different country, like it’s it’s just not going to work.

So I think building systems that are kind of designed to evolve and change and I set out, well, to do that is really important and not kind of expecting to set those things in stone.

I I do agree that you don’t need to solve all those things up front, uh, and it can really feel boil the ocean like when you get into those conversations and they can swirl into lots of different directions like with just designing a component. Frankly, these kind of things I tell a story about designing a card component for example, and there’s so many different features and ways that you can approach solving a card as a component in your design system. But ultimately I try as a person to facilitate the conversation around the range of things that people are talking about, and then first start to say: there’s clearly not alignment in these, this first third of things, and can we all just agree we don’t need to solve for those right now? let’s just put those down the line, let’s not have those conversations yet, let’s not have opinions.

And then there’s this second set of things where we actually all agree, and can we acknowledge all the things that we agree on? And then there’s a third set of things in the middle that we need to kind of agree and not agree on enough so that we can move forward. And so I use the term: can we make a provisional decision to choose A, B, and C, and we’ll let data that we feel back or get back into the system, or we’ll let other constraints that we see emerging enable us to acknowledge A, B, and C are still squishy. We’re moving forward with A, B, and C, and if they need to change we’ll change them. Uh, everybody cool with going forward with ABNC for now until we learn more? And that provision sort of giving that an implicit provisional prepended term in front of those decisions disarms the group: okay, yes, we, that that and it enables the group to be able to say in another week: I’m bringing up B again because I learned these two other things, we need to change our view on B. And so that sort of disarms and empowers the team to to continue to grow together.

It’s funny, Nathan, I have my own version of that. The phrase that I use is McDonald’s Theory. Uh, do you know, do you know that phrase? No. So it comes from from John Bell who was a designer that worked at Twitter for a while, and I don’t know where he is now but he wrote this great article about uh about McDonald’s Theory, which is that when when you try to decide with a group where to go for lunch, you know, it’s always weird because everybody’s like where do you want to go for lunch and everybody’s like oh I don’t know. But instead he’s like, so what I do is I go: hey everybody, let’s go to McDonald’s. And as soon as he says that everybody’s like no, no, I don’t want to go to McDonald’s, that’s dumb, that’s you know I’d rather have something healthier. Let’s go for Thai food. No, I don’t want Thai food, I had Thai food last week. Let’s do pizza. And like, is the theory—The McDonald’s Theory is people will come up with better ideas to ward off bad ones, right? So same idea, you know, a provisional decision.

And so that’s a thing that a lot of the teams that I work with, they adopt that vocabulary now where they go like: well, let’s just McDonald’s Theory this, which is basically meaning let’s just suggest a thing that we’re going to start with, and if somebody has a better decision they will service it, and if we don’t, well then that’s the best decision for right now until we come up with something a week later, two weeks later. So the that idea, I think, I think that idea whatever we call it is so important in design systems and I think is a little bit antithetical to what design system thing teams think they should be doing, which is like: we got to say what the best thing to do is, right? Like so we have to have the answer. And it’s like, well yeah but like you know how hard it is to have like the best answer right now, so let’s have the best answer for now, I guess, until a better answer comes along. And let that be fine, let that be normal, as that like this is what we did and said and then this is what we learned and now we have this new thing that we’re going to operate with. But I find a lot of teams have trouble with that idea, that they’re like: but we can’t change it though because we’re supposed to be the rules, right? McDonald’s Theory.

I’m stealing that, and I like I think yeah, it’s really interesting because I think something that it does is it forces people to also think about what they care about. Like I think it’s really hard to be given a kind of blank canvas and say like what do you care about, what, what you know as I kind of did at the start this conversation to say like: what are your non-negotiables, what are you willing to kind of move on? Whereas actually doing what you said and kind of proposing something like you learn a lot from your reaction to that thing, don’t you? So you can kind of you can you know potentially like I think sometimes people aren’t just being polite, I think sometimes people genuinely don’t really know what matters to them or what they feel kind of strongly about until it’s put in front of them.

So I like that idea. I am interested in um this kind of this idea about sort of we can always evolve things and we can always change things. I absolutely do think that design systems need to be sort of designed to evolve and teams need to be set up to kind of evolve with them, but I’m interested in sort of if you have any thoughts about what the right kind of balance is and if that varies because I certainly think it varies between clients that I’ve seen. Um, because you know my stance I guess would have been once upon a time like the more that you introduce kind of improvements to the system and the more you’re sort of forcing updates on your teams, like that creates quite an unstable system and potentially like certainly in government I really noticed like that was that was a problem, like teams were not set up to be kind of constantly um bringing in changes especially kind of breaking changes and stuff, so we had to be really mindful of that.

And I just wonder like if you have kind of thoughts on you know where the line is there or like how you go about finding the line.

I think uh certainty is something that people expect out of a design system. The design system is the place for the answers that everybody’s made, and once it’s answered we can move forward with confidence. And so whether it’s what your vision of the system is in general versus how you’re labeling your scale of typography size choices, when you uh ruffle the feathers of that uncertainty and you start to change those things, uh it does create an instability. And so I often characterize the most mature and effective systems are the ones that have prepared the people that use those systems to change at the rates that they need and want to change in a way that’s fairly predictable. And so you make the change visible, you communicate how it works really well, you’re really sensitive to the fact that uh people might not want to upgrade when you make the change, but how does that enable them to change the things they want to change and not change the other things they don’t want to change, which is you get into questions around component versus library level versioning. Uh, as a part of that, I want to change my button but I don’t have to upgrade my modals and my banners and my toasts in order to get the change for the button, and so that makes people anxious.

Um, on the other end of the spectrum though I worked with a client uh that said we used to change so often, and then we went to quarterly enhancement releases and annual breaking change releases just because we heard from our community that created the predictable cadence that they could target with how they’re thinking about their apps. And can you imagine like that, you know, when the next major change is going to come, and if the only thing that will disrupt that is external forces like a rebrand or something like that, but still like that kind of predictability so that they can time how they change with how they know you’re gonna change is just the visible and transparent communications between the two. And how can you make that really, really predictable?

Yeah, and I just think like a really interesting question that raises is like yeah, there’s absolutely value in that kind of predictable cadence of releases, but how does that impact our kind of original question about quality and what’s good enough to release? Because if you know you’re not going to change this thing again for a year, like does that not raise the bar?

I haven’t. I don’t think I’ve ever said it this way, so I’m mostly just thinking out loud, you know, so I’m going to riff on on something that Nathan said and and that you said, Amy. The idea of design systems being certainty, I’m like: that feels like mostly right to me or mostly accurate to me, but there’s like a nuance that’s off. Which to me I think about design system and I’m never again, I’ve never used this phrase, I’m gonna try it out here: it’s most it’s more about the proximity to certainty than certainty itself, right? That like the fact that and this is why this is why I try to help teams evolve their thinking from a design system as like you know a library because like that’s that’s a limiting view of a design, it’s accurate but it’s a limiting view. And thinking about it as like you know it’s like the way that we do things, right? Like if you think about it in that broader sense, then the way that we do things is always changing, it’s supposed to change, because because otherwise if it doesn’t change that means we haven’t learned anything new since we established the thing and that’s actually a poor thing for culture, right.

And I think that’s why a lot of design system work is culture work more than it is like component building, you know, or designing work, I think. I would imagine we would agree on that, and a bit, I imagine a few more people would agree on that too. And so like it’s the proximity to certainty where I always know what main brand color is going to be even if it changes. And if it, if if on my feature that I’m working on main brand color was pink and then there was a rebrand and main brand color is orange now, well the proximity to orange is actually one npm update away, like I could choose to do it or I could choose not to do it, you know, on my feature or on my team, I could be mandated by my manager that we have to upgrade to the new brand by whatever, but it’s it’s the without a design system your proximity you’re a lot farther away from making that change because now you’re a product cycle away: well we actually need two new sprints to open that code base again and then we have to refactor all this stuff, whereas built on a design system well it’s an easy change. So it’s that proximity, I think that like that is important about the design system, not actually the fact that you’re always going to have the certain thing you know right away real time. I think that’s a a tough expectation.

I think like a mathematician, I have a mathematics degree, um, and so convergence on the truth as opposed to the truth. People talk about design systems as a source of truth, and so it actually isn’t, this shouldn’t be the source of truth, it’s the source of the pursuit of the truth, and we’re always going to be converging towards that but the truth will maybe never, probably it really is never really reached.

I know someone works at Shopify as a dev, devops, dev tools person, he worked at Salesforce, he did a lot of token work and and uh and so on, he he’s the person that helped me see: yeah, design systems are sort of always converging, always trying to reach for what the answers are and helping everybody else understand what the answers are, but we’re never really going to get there, and that’s okay. And so how do you help other people understand that you’re converging, you’re actually not the source of perfect unchanging truth?

Yeah. I was just going to say like a way that we kind of experimented with that in government was with being kind of fairly explicit about our uncertainties. So you know at the point of kind of releasing components like being quite clear in the documentation like we had a section in the documentation called like known gaps, known issues, known gaps and things. And actually, you know, people something we learned from that is that people are much more forgiving of you not having the answers if you’re explicit about not having the answers. And I think sometimes that idea that design systems have to provide certainty, I think is a is a line that design system teams tell themselves, and actually I think where we get into trouble sometimes is obscuring that we are uncertain about something. It’s like oh, you know, this is our best guess but we’ll put it live and pretend it’s like the best thing ever and we’re really confident in it, and actually you know sometimes we do have to put things live where we don’t have the answers, and and that’s I think it’s empowering for teams to know that we don’t have the answers and to know where the gaps are because then they can help us to fill them.

I think that’s how I think about most things related to design systems: is the design system the pursuit of all of these things that we hold as as good—quality, consistency, certainty, all the ty words, right like. And I don’t know if this is pessimistic or realist or what, but like the idea that we will never reach them shouldn’t be a deterrent to doing them, right. Like so so I and I think that that sort of relates to all the stuff that we’ve talked about both here and the last time that we talked, which is you know the things that we measure, even though they’re hard to measure, and even if we might not actually achieve them, it’s still worth it to do a lot of those things because you’re making the system better by doing it.

And I think that a lot, I see a lot of teams have a lot of dogma. I think Amy maybe you might have tweeted about this recently like twice, just a little bit, uh, the idea that like design systems are about creating or establishing or enforcing this dogma, that like it’s got to be this way, and I’m like I think that’s an unkind way to think about what a design system’s role is at an organization. Like I think I think it’s there to say like: this is the current state of things, and if you want to be up to date with the current state of things, here you go, do it like this, you know, do it with these things, with these assets and these ways, you know, and then you’ll be on par with what everybody else is doing here. Whether on par is a good thing or are a bad thing, at least on par, you know, so so on par without judgment about whether that’s a good thing or a bad thing to do.

And I think the teams that try to strive for like we’re gonna define a rule are ones that have a tough job and a tough road ahead of them, whereas the teams that tend to be like we’re just gonna try to capture this for everyone and make it easier for them to be at this at this bar, wherever that bar is, you know, for us, and that it’s not it, it’s not a relative measure that it’s not like well this bar is like 50 of where we want to get to, but it’s just this is where we are, you know. And I think I think one of the things that that really bugged me about the culture of of product work I think Nathan, you you said this a little while ago is that a lot of teams don’t have in their product roadmap a way to change to go back and change things. So when something changes in the design system they’re like: well that was four sprints ago and we are never going to go back to that. I was like okay, well then that product is going to remain legacy, you know, for some version of legacy, because you haven’t built into the culture the idea that you’re going to go back and change things, which I think should be part of digital product work in general: is we learned a thing, we’re going to go make it better for people, you know, if that product is still worth worth living.

So I think like that that’s the stuff that needs to change organizationally culturally in order to really make good use of a design system: is you know our product cycles have to accommodate that and not only accommodate but encourage that. So something like saying this is the week where you’re you should expect updates to happen. Well great, now everybody knows because it’s planned in advance, you know.

One of the things that we do with teams a lot that’s super friendly is we build in what’s called the systems week, and it’s sort of like a three to one ratio of like three, three weeks out of four we’re going to do product work, you know, and that’s what the design system is going to support, but then one week out of four we’re going to do stuff that’s not going to touch product until later, you know, which is like we’re going to do some with some spring cleaning, we’re going to clean up some stuff, we’re going to re refactor APIs, we’re going to do some design updates that we’ve been meaning to do in our Figma, like we’re going to do some of the spring cleaning. And I think that cadence has I’ve seen that start to like really affect teams in a positive way where they’re like: we that’s the work that we want to do as a systems team, but the priority on that work is not over indexed and it’s not under indexed, it’s like proportional to what it’s supposed to serve.

So I think that idea of like we need to set up a cadence in advance that people can go: oh this is where that work goes, um, I think it really helps people with going like oh now I know, so now I don’t have to be anxious about it, I don’t have to go like sneak that work, you know, in between the cracks. I can really just go like all right, three weeks from now that’s where I’m gonna do that work, or three or four weeks from now that’s where I’m gonna expect these updates to come and we can plan for it.

I think too when you think about dealing with change, it’s not just can we change and are we going to change, but it’s the users of a system wanting to know: when will you have that change, and how much will that change from what I have today? A couple examples being when you have a backlog of components you haven’t actually delivered on yet, it’s not just that they want to know that it’s in the backlog, they want to be able to anticipate: well are you going to deliver it within two months because if not we’ll build it ourselves. And that’s okay, and everybody has to be okay with the sort of relationship of the timing of those two things.

The other one is when you’re going through a major release cycle that has a major version number on it just because you’re making some breaking changes that nevertheless will take a dev team of any competence about a day to complete to like weave through the new naming structure, do some other things. But then the product manager sees a breaking change and they think the consequence of that is complete UI refactor, which really isn’t what it is, that the scale of the work is is different. And so helping them understand when the change is going to happen and how much that’s going to impact what they’ve already done are the other things that you want to keep your eye on, and that’s such an underrated part of the design system work.

Is when you know, I I was working with a team just last week and we were working on a component status page and the first inclination was you know here’s the here’s the backlog components that we have and the status that they put was “upcoming”, and I was like well that doesn’t say anything like of course it’s up, it just says it’s one day we’ll work on it. I’m like: what could we do to set a better expectation even if it’s a long expectation? And so what they wrote was “upcoming 2022”. I was like great, like that’s something that just means sometime this year we’ll do it, so if you need it next month you know don’t hold your breath that we’re gonna do this; if you can wait till 2023 because that’s where it is on your roadmap, well then we’ll, we will have it for you because we’ve promised it. And I was like and it doesn’t mean that we can’t change those dates, we could totally change those dates, but we have to tell people about those to set those expectations.

So like just even it’s still broad but changing “upcoming” to “upcoming 2022” or “upcoming Q4” like already gives teams a lot of like oh now we know what to do with that piece of information.

Yeah, I think that’s so important, that the whole kind of expectation management issue because like I think I’m sort of getting to a place where I’m wanting to separate out component like design system backlogs from here’s a list of components we know about that exists like in the world. Because actually like you know when you’ve got 250 components on your backlog like it’s not, some of those things are just not going to get touched for years or maybe ever. And I think it’s almost like having that status I think is important because you can you can be honest about the fact that there are some things that you’re just not actively working on.

And I think like a really important piece here as well around expectation management is I don’t know if this is something you’ve both seen but certainly like something I’ve noticed is that with um with design system clients, what I quite often kind of engage with them at the point that they just had the business case signed off and they’re like right great, we need some people to come in and help us make it happen then. And what has happened is that for several years usually there’s someone who’s been sort of like banging the design systems drum and saying: we need a design system, we’ve got so much inconsistency and efficiency and we need to make things better, and stakeholders have remained unpersuaded. And at some point they go okay, yeah, they have to have some money, build a design system, and then all of a sudden those stakeholders that have been being really resistant to the idea and all those teams who’ve been being quite resistant to the idea are like: well okay, can I have this component tomorrow please? And like the message that I try try and quite often sort of emphasize to clients is: this isn’t a new problem, like this inconsistency in teams building product level solutions for something that probably should be centralized has been happening this whole time and you’ve survived. Like yes, we want to fix that, yes we want to make it more efficient and more consistent, but it’s okay to see that as something that we’re going to chip away at over time, not something we’re going to solve in a minute.

And I think that that’s just a really kind of interesting dynamic for me: it’s like I think with any other product you would expect this sort of iterative development, but with design systems it’s quite often the bar is set quite high from day one and and people become sort of something that was happening all the time as standard suddenly becomes intolerable, you know, it’s like absolutely, absolutely not, we won’t be building one of these at a product level.

To me that’s the a challenge because we’re not building with them, we’ll we’re building for them, and the the nature of using design systems is implicitly or explicitly they choose to depend on us and depend, have a dependency on the work we do, and so they want to understand: what’s the nature of that dependency, how stable is that dependency going to be, how much is it going to offer me in a timely way the things I want to depend on? Because if it’s not going to it’s not going to be a good fit for me. And when I put my like like adopter hat on like that all the way I was explaining that is from the point of view of the adopter, I totally get it like if we’re not going to be able to deliver things in a timely way and make sure that they’re high enough quality, then they don’t they don’t want to do them, they don’t want to have that dependency, and so that people see what we do as just another squad, and all these squads making software, no, no work, different relationship to them, and that’s what you really need to break in terms of assumptions around the relationship.

How much do you think quality affects that judgment from the adopter standpoint?

I go with: the system has to be as good or better than what they would have made themselves in a reasonable amount of time, or else they’re not going to want to use it.

Yeah, I agree with that. I think like it’s I kind of find myself saying a lot: this design system isn’t replacing nothing, it’s replacing the you know context specific and probably quite good solutions that product teams are coming up with on their own, so it has to be better than that, otherwise what’s the point.

For this full circle now, the first thing that makes me think of is like: I’ve seen a lot of adopters choose a lower quality and I realized it’s loaded a lower quality product, but because it’s faster. So like it’s not better than what they would have done, but it’s faster than what they would have done otherwise, so they choose it. So back to speed. That that’s what stumped me about your question, Amy, your prompt: it was like if we remove speed, what are you know what, how does that change the dynamic of designs work? And I’m like man that’s really breaking my brain because I’ve seen so many people opt for speed at the expense of a lot of other—at the expense of consistency, quality, you know, like a bunch of other things—and speed is such a such a determinant for them that I’m like I don’t know what that would look like, and I’m curious if you have initial thoughts about that like what that dynamic would look like if we just took that off the table, I guess like.

My initial response to that is that it is so dependent on the culture of the organization that we’re talking about and stuff, because I think ultimately we’re all trying to get to better quality. That’s that’s the point of moving faster, that’s the point of you know we we see that as a route to being able to kind of test and iterate more often and therefore get to something better and more quickly. Um, and I think that it’s where the teams buy into that or not, and that is dependent on kind of organizational culture. So if they see using the quicker but maybe slightly less great than they could have made it thing as a route to getting somewhere good faster, then I absolutely see why they would, why they would make that choice. But I think I’ve also seen probably more of organizational cultures where they’re quite suspicious of that because they aren’t given the opportunity to iterate and they aren’t set up well to support you know teams that are sharing developers with six other teams and you know have one day where they’re able to make changes in production like a week or something, you know, and and those teams I think are much more suspicious of of taking something that they don’t think kind of matches what they could do on their own time.

So again a hard it depends. To me design systems accelerate and substitute some of the problems that a team that uses a design system is out there to solve, because they are actually trying to solve a real problem: schedule a doctor’s appointment, buy a product, you know, submit insurance documents, whatever it is, that actually the the system or the products trying to facilitate. Design systems and quality, you ratchet down one or two levels from in terms of the level of importance of solving that big problem, and that’s the problem, those are the problems that product teams are trying to solve, and so you’re an accelerator, you’re an improver, you can help replace things that they then don’t have to do themselves, but they don’t have to use the system to solve the problem necessarily—unless there’s some bigger force at play and like Material: everything at Google has to be Material because that’s the identity that we have as a company. Okay, that’s a different problem, and suddenly the system plays a different role, but most teams don’t start their relationship with the system because of that.

I love this conversation because we are talking about all sorts of cool important stuff. We’re getting close to the time that we scheduled, so Amy, Nathan, you got any closing thoughts, anything that you found interesting about this conversation or a hot take that you want to get out there before we run out of time?

God, I have so many closing thoughts, I have so many opening thoughts, um. I think something that feels important to me is kind of specificity of what we mean when we say equality—I think that we’ve talked about a lot of different things, and just in the course of our conversation it’s it’s clear that you know we we’re probably closer than we maybe think we are; it’s the way that we describe these things and the way that we emphasize them, but actually we’re all going to have things that we don’t think are acceptable to give to teams, and we’re all going to have things that we’re happy to kind of you know experiment with and see.

Um, I think definitely the kind of the conversation around predictability feels important to me because I think that that’s maybe something that we don’t talk about enough, but perhaps ties a lot of this together. Like if teams know, if teams have clear expectations about you know when they can expect improvements and updates and when they’re going to have to accommodate those things, like that does that gives them an important piece of information to make decisions about whether they take the system solution or do their own thing, and I think that you know that’s that’s quite critical. Um, but god I could just keep talking all day, so I won’t keep going. Keep going? No, it’s too there’s too much.

I guess the only yeah, I’m gonna throw one more thought: the only other thing that kind of occurred to me which we didn’t really talk about at all but is this: when we’re talking, when we were having that conversation about you know teams are choosing to depend on the system or not, and that they need kind of things to be happening in a timely manner, um, the thing that drives me crazy is working with organizations where you kind of say well you know given this the size team we have, this is the rate at which we’re going to be able to turn these things out, so that’s what we need to communicate, and they go: it’s okay, because we’re just gonna open source it, we’re just gonna like just—you say like how are you, how can we speed this up, can we have more people on the team? No, people would just contribute to it. It’s like: contribution as a solution to speed as um—I just, anyway I, that’s a discussion for another time, but it it opened up in my mind through this one, such a false promise.

The one thing I would say is uh: design systems, the good design systems really enable their customers to use all their stuff fluidly and create a great dependency, and so on, the best design systems are ones that help the people that use it change over time. And so the pro the, your ability to make it easy to change, easy to adapt and evolve, easy to stay in touch, like, uh, essentially a fresh dependency rather than one that ages, ages, ages, and then just breaks off like a rubber band that snaps. Those are the best systems that I really respect.